First DevBootcamp Blog Post

Version Control and GitHub for Beginners (by a Beginner)

Friday, Nov. 21, 2014

Think about when you write an essay. No matter how great a writer you are, it is almost always a good idea to have someone edit your work before you publish it to a broad audience. You may email your work off to a friend or family member for feedback. Your editor will likely return the same document to you, but with some suggested changes. Now you have more than one version of the same document – one original copy and one with edits. If it is an especially important piece of writing, you may send it out to several friends and get several edited versions back. If you are not careful, things get confusing quickly with more than one version of the same document floating around!

Enter version control. Coming from a communications background, the notion of version control is fairly intuitive, as it was an integral part of my everyday work. Basically, as in the document scenario, version control helps you incorporate all the changes into your final document and, if necessary, discover where an error developed and go back to that place to remove the problem.

Git helps with version control by requiring you to “commit” (or as I think of it, comment and commit) every time you make changes to your files. When you “commit,” you a) acknowledge that you do, in fact, want to save the changes that you’ve made and b) state what those changes were, so that if something is wrong and the changes aren’t good, it’s easy to identify when the change was made so that you can roll it back.

GitHub is an online community where you can store your code. There are a number of benefits to storing code online, namely, of course, that it can be accessed anywhere rather than just on your local machine. GitHub is especially nice, though, because it enables you to work as a team so that many people can work on the same projects together and collaborate on solutions. 

That’s all for the moment! More to come when I’ve got more to share.
